>> Kyle Simpson: Our last
unit of discussion for
the course is asynchronous programming.
Now I wanna clearly state, we are not
doing even a remotely an exhaustive
discussion of asynchronous programming.
I have a whole day and
half long course here on Frontend Masters
about asynchronous programming.
What I wanna do specifically is narrow in
on how everything that we've learned up to
this point in this course,
converts to talking about values
not that are just immediately present but
rather values that are present over time.
So here's the synchronous version of
what we've been doing, an example.
We start out with a list and
the values are already here.
And I can map over those values
because they are already present and
I get an immediate b list back that has
the immediately transformed values in it.
That works really well when
the data is already present.
But what about if the data is
gonna come to you over time?
If the data is coming to
you from network responses.
Or the data is a set of mouse clicks.
Or it's a set of WebSocket events.
Or it's stuff from a web worker or
who knows?
Any possible source of a-synchrony
that's in your application can
have data coming to you over time.
So harkening back to something that we
talked about earlier in the course.
The difference between eager and lazy.
This is the eager approach
to data operations.
Eager meaning we have it right now,
we're gonna do it right now.
The lazy approach is essentially to
say I'll do it whenever it shows up.
That's cool, take your time.
Whenever that data shows up
I'll perform the operation.
That's essentially how we take everything
that we've learned in this course about
functional programming and
extend it over time.
Functional programming over time, that's
basically what functional async sometimes
as referred to as reactive programming
it has a lot of different names.
Basically what it is is taking
functional programming techniques and
extending them over time.
FRP functional reactive programming.
That is another term.
A lot of different terms that
refer to the same concept.
So it really is about eager versus lazy.
So I want you to imagine just for a moment
that I had a utility called map lazy.
This is a special kind of utility and
let's look at what it does.
I make an a Array that's empty.
And then I make a b that
is the lazy mapping of a.
That means that right now both a and
b are completely empty.
But what I've said is If this
mapLazy utility were to exist.
I've said that at any point in the future,
if I push a value into a,
I want that mapper to run across
that same value and stick it into b.
So as soon as I call a.push(1),
that 1 is in a of 0.
But it's also been transformed
into the value 2 at b[0].
So it almost sort of magically
propagated itself to this other array.
Do we see how that's taking functional
concepts and extending them over time?
This lazy mapping is just
one example that I'm using.
Later, we can call, a.push(2), same thing
happens: two shows up in the second
position of a, the doubling of that
shows up in the second position of b.
So it's almost like these arrays
are like streams of values.
These lazy arrays are basically
just streams of values.
Whenever one piece of date
comes into this stream,
it gets transformed and
sent along this stream.
If the regular array is the eager version.
The lazy array would be the lazy
version of the same concept.
And all the operations that you can think
of like map and filter and reduce and
100 others they can all be
modeled either eagerly or lazily.
So just like I showed you
how we could take map and
we could adapt it from a list to an object
to any other kind of a data structure.
You can also left map to work all the time
and that's what mapLazy would be doing.
Now that's just an ad hoc
invention of mine and
I want to move the discussion from
the operator itself to the data structure
because we really want to use
the appropriate data structure for this
so let's now think about what
if I could create a lazy array.
A LazyArray would automatically have map,
filter and
reduce functions on it that
just knew what to do over time.
We don't need separate utilities for it,
we can just deal with it
on the data structure.
So, here is a LazyArray.
Essentially the top of
this is the producer.
This is the source of data.
We've got a set interval that's
gonna run once a second and
push a random number into
the a LazyAarray, aka the a stream.
And on the bottom, starting with line 9,
I've got an observer.
This observer is observing
that a stream and
every time a piece of data comes
into the a stream it gets mapped,
it gets transformed and
put into the b stream.
And so
on line 13 I just call.4 each essentially.
And I want this function to be called,
this on value function to be called
every time there's a new piece of data.
So once a second we generate a random
number, and then that would double
in the b array and be exposed by calling
the on value with that new mapped value.
Everything we just talked about
with eager functional programming,
but now we've extended
it lazily over time.
>> Kyle Simpson: That's
actually one of my favorite and
most exciting parts of functional
programming, that all of these concepts
that we've learned that work synchronously
eagerly, they all work exactly the same.
Or not exactly, but
they all work conceptually similarly
when we extend them over time.
That's really powerful.
Analyses the model of the entirety of
our application using the same co-set of
principles.
Now, LazyArray is an invention of mind for
the purposes of illustration.
What we really mean,
what we really need is an observable.
LazyArray here is otherwise known as,
aka, observables.
Any of your heard of observables?
Maybe you've read some
blog post about them.
They're certainly hot these days.
There's some fantastic courses
here on Frontend Masters about
asynchronous programming
talking about Observables.
I cover observables in my course as well.
So I just wanna briefly show you
an example of using observables with
a library that implements them.
There's tons of power there that
we're not even remotely gonna scratch
the surface with.
The RXJX library, it's a port of the RX
library to the JavaScript language.
And, we can create a stream if you will.
In this case they call it a subject.
But I can create a stream
by saying new Rx.Subject.
And then, every once a second,
I can just call a.next which
pushes a value into that subject.
And then down on line nine,
I can subscribed to that subject,
that observable, that stream,
whatever term you wanna use.
And then line 13,
I called .subscribe on it.
So that's basically the exact
same as the previous snippet,
the LazyArray that I made up except
this isn't real existent thing.
And we use .subscribe instead
of .foreach But this exists.
This library's been around for
a number of years.
There's a giant community around it.
It's a great place to get started.
There are other observables
libraries if you're interested.
I've got one, but
RXJX is by far the one with the most
documentation and community support.
It just can be a very daunting set
of documentation to go up against.
So, make sure you allot plenty of time
if you want to start learning Rx.